
### Images

Alongside text, graphics have always been central to how computers communicate with their
users. In the earliest systems, screens were limited to showing characters, but as technology
advanced, displays began to support images and geometric shapes. This shift marked a
transition from computers as tools for symbol manipulation to machines capable of rich
visual expression.

At the lowest level, computer graphics rely on the *pixel*, the smallest unit of a digital
display. An image is formed from a grid of pixels, each with a colour value that the screen
can illuminate. Early displays offered only black and white, then a handful of colours, but
modern screens can render millions of shades. Images stored as pixel data are called bitmaps
or raster graphics. They capture detail faithfully but do not scale well: enlarging a bitmap
often produces blocky, jagged results.

An alternative approach is *vector graphics*, which represent shapes using mathematical
descriptions of lines, curves, and fills rather than fixed pixels. Because vectors can be
scaled to any size without loss of quality, they are widely used in design, technical drawing,
and text rendering. The trade-off is that highly detailed or photographic images are
impractical to describe in vector form, so raster and vector methods often coexist.

Displaying graphics on computers also requires careful attention to rendering. The process of
converting stored image data into the correct pattern of pixels involves handling colour models
(such as RGB), scaling, anti-aliasing, and increasingly, hardware acceleration by graphics
processors (GPUs). Rendering ensures that an image or shape appears smoothly and consistently,
whether it is a photo, a window on the desktop, or a moving game character.

Beyond static images, computers also generate graphics dynamically. User interfaces rely on
drawing windows, icons, and controls; scientific applications display charts and simulations;
games and media produce immersive, animated environments. In each case, the computer must
combine geometry, colour, and timing into a coherent visual output.

The history of computer graphics is therefore one of constant expansion: from the simple dots
and lines of oscilloscopes and vector displays, to the colour bitmaps of early PCs, and now to
high-resolution, three-dimensional environments rendered in real time. Graphics, like text,
have become an essential medium through which computers both represent information and
engage human perception.

